Bibliography
Midlife in the United States (MIDUS 1) National Study of Daily Experiences
(NSDE), 1996-1997

This bibliography includes published and unpublished works that are related 
to ICPSR study 3725. It includes works that are based on primary
or secondary analysis of the data, or which describe or critique those
data or the collection methodology. 

If you publish a work or know of other works that are based on these data,
please send the complete citation and name of the ICPSR study used to:
icpsr-biblio-notify@umich.edu 


1. Almeida, D.M.; Chai, H. Won; Joo, S.; Sin, N.; Charles, S.T., "Living a
Stressor-Free  Daily Life: Prevalence and Psychosocial Correlates."
Presented at the Gerontological Society of America 2018 Annual Scientific
Meeting, Gerontological Society of America, Boston, MA, Nov 14-18, 2018.
DOI: 10.1093/geroni/igy023.2188

2. Almeida, D.M.; Mroczek, D.K.; Neiss, M., "Can self-regulation explain
age differences in daily, weekly and monthly reports of psychological
distress?." In Schaie, K.W.; Carstensen, L.L., Social Structure, Aging and
Self-Regulation in the Elderly. New York, NY: Springer,2006.

3. Almeida, D.M.; Neupert, Shevaun D.; Banks, S.R.; Serido, Joyce, "Do
daily stress processes account for socioeconomic health disparities?."
Journals of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences. 2005, 60B, (Special Issue II), 34 - 39. DOI:
10.1093/geronb/60.Special_Issue_2.S34

4. Almeida, D.M.; Serido, Joyce; McDonald, D.A., "Daily life stressors of
early and late baby boomers." In Whitbourne, S.K.; Willis, S.L., The Baby
Boomers Grow Up: Contemporary Perspectives on Midlife. New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates,2006.

5. Almeida, David M., "Resilience and vulnerability to daily stressors
assessed via diary methods." Current Directions in Psychological Science.
2005, 14, (2), 62 - 68. DOI: 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00336.x

6. Almeida, David M., "Using daily diaries to assess temporal friction
between work and family." In Crouter, A.C.; Booth, A., Work-family
challenges for low income parents and their children. 127 - 136, Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates,2004.

7. Almeida, David M.; Horn, Melanie C., "Is daily life more stressful
during middle adulthood?." In Brim, Orville Gilbert; Ryff, Carol D.;
Kessler, Ronald C., How Healthy Are We?: A National Study of Well-being at
Midlife. 425 - 451, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,2004.

8. Almeida, David M.; McDonald, D. A., "The time Americans spend working
for pay, caring for families, and contributing to communities." In Heymann,
J., Unfinished Work: Balancing Equity and Democracy in an Era of working
Families. 180 - 203, New York, NY: The New Press,2005.

9. Almeida, David M.; McDonald, Daniel A.; Havens, John; Schervish, P.,
"Temporal patterns in social responsibility." In Rossi, Alice S., Caring
and Doing for Others: Social Responsibility in the Domains of Family, Work,
and Community. 135 - 156, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,2001.

10. Almeida, David M.; Neiss, M., "Age differences in daily weekly and
monthly reports of affective distress: Social influences on adult
personality, self-regulation and health." In Carstensen, L.; Schaefer, H.
S., Social Structure, Aging and Self-Regulation. New York, NY:
Springer,2006.

11. Almeida, David M.; Wethington, Elaine; Kessler, Ronald C., "The Daily
Inventory of Stressful Events (DISE):  An interview-based approach for
measuring daily stressors." Assessment. Mar 2002, 9, (1), 41 - 55. DOI:
10.1177/1073191102091006

12. Almeida, David M.; Wethington, Elaine; McDonald, Daniel A., "Daily
variation in paternal engagement and negative mood: Implications for
emotionally supportive and conflictual interactions." Journal of Marriage
and Family. May 2001, 63, (2), 417 - 429. DOI: 10.1111/j.1741-
3737.2001.00417.x

13. Birditt, K.S.; Fingerman, K.L.; Almeida, D.M., "Age differences in
exposure and reactions to interpersonal tensions: A daily diary study."
Psychology and Aging. Jun 2005, 20, (2), 330 - 340. DOI: 10.1037/0882-
7974.20.2.330

14. Blozis, Shelley A.; McTernan, Melissa; Harring, Jeffrey R.; Zheng,
Qiwen, "Two-part mixed-effects location scale models." Behavior Research
Methods. In press 2020,. DOI: 10.3758/s13428-020-01359-7

15. Charles, S.T.; Piazza, J.R.; Mogle, J.; Sliwinski, M.J.; Almeida, D.M.,
"The wear and tear of daily stressors on mental health." Psychological
Science. in press 2013,. DOI: 10.1177/0956797612462222

16. Charles, Susan Turk; Almeida, D.M., "Genetic and environmental effects
on daily life stressors: More evidence for greater variation in later
life." Psychology and Aging. Jun 2007, 22, (2), 331 - 340. DOI:
10.1037/0882-7974.22.2.331

17. Charles, Susan Turk; Almeida, David M., "Daily reports of symptoms and
negative affect: Not all symptoms are the same." Psychology and Health. Feb
2006, 21, (1), 1 - 17. DOI: 10.1080/14768320500129239

18. Chiang, J.J.; Turiano, N.A.; Mroczek, D.K.; Miller, G.E., "Affective
reactivity to daily stress and 20-year mortality risk in adults with
chronic illness: Findings from the National Study of Daily Experiences."
Health Psychology. Feb 2018, 37, (2), 170 - 178. DOI: 10.1037/hea0000567

19. Friedman, Elliot M.; Mroczek, Daniel K.; Christ, Sharon L.,
"Multimorbidity, inflammation, and disability: A longitudinal mediational
analysis." Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease. 2019,. DOI:
10.1177/2040622318806848

20. Gough, Margaret; Godde, Kanya, "A multifaceted analysis of social
stressors and chronic inflammation." SSM - Population Health. Sep 2018, 6,
136 - 140. DOI: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2018.09.005

21. Gough, Margaret; Godde, Kanya, "Accelerated aging: The role of
socioeconomic, social, demographic, and biological factors on bone mineral
density." Research on Aging. In press 2018,. DOI: 10.1177/0164027518816516

22. Greenfield, Emily A.; Marks, Nadine F., "Sense of community as a
protective factor against long-term psychological effects of childhood
violence." Social Service Review. 2010, 84, (1), 129 - 147. DOI:
10.1086/652786

23. Grzywacz, Joseph G.; Almeida, David M.; McDonald, Daniel A., "Work-
family spillover and daily reports of work and family stress in the adult
labor force." Family Relations. Jan 2002, 51, (1), 28 - 36. DOI:
10.1111/j.1741-3729.2002.00028.x

24. Grzywacz, Joseph G.; Almeida, David M.; Neupert, Shevaun D.; Ettner,
Susan L., "Socioeconomic status and health: A micro-level analysis of
exposure and vulnerability to daily stressors." Journal of Health and
Social Behavior. Mar 2004, 45, (1),. DOI: 10.1177/002214650404500101

25. Hittner, Emily F.; Rim, Katie L.; Haase, Claudia M., "Socioeconomic
status as a moderator of the link between reappraisal and anxiety:
Laboratory-based and longitudinal evidence." Emotion. In press 2018,. DOI:
10.1037/emo0000539

26. Karlamangla, Arun S.; Merkin, Sharon S.; Almeida, David M.; Friedman,
Esther M.; Mogle, Jacqueline A.; Seeman, Teresa E., "Early-life adversity
and dysregulation of adult diurnal cortisol rhythm." Journals of
Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. Jan
2019, 74, (1), 160 - 169. DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gby097

27. Kessler, Ronald C.; Almeida, David M.; Berglund, Patricia; Stang, Paul,
"Pollen and mold exposure impairs the work performance of employees with
allergic rhinitis." Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Oct 2001, 87,
(4), 289 - 295. DOI: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)62242-9

28. Lee, Soomi; Koffer, Rachel E.; Sprague, Briana N.; Charles, Susan T.;
Ram, Nilam; Almeida, David M., "Activity diversity and Its associations
with psychological well-being across adulthood." Journals of Gerontology,
Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. Sep 2016, gbw118.
DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbw118

29. Liu, Y.; Bangerter, L.R.; Rovine, M.J.; Zarit, S.H.; Almeida, D.M.,
"Intrinsic emotional fluctuation in daily negative affect across
adulthood." Journals of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences. Dec 2016, 73, (1), 100 - 112. DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gbw159

30. Mallers, M.C.; Almeida, D.M.; Neupert, Shevaun D., "Women's daily
physical health symptoms and stressful experiences across adulthood."
Psychology and Health. 2005, 20, (3), 389 - 403. DOI:
10.1080/08870440512331317698

31. Mallers, Melanie H.; Charles, Susan T.; Neupert, Shevaun D.; Almeida,
David M., "Perceptions of childhood relationships with mother and father:
Daily emotional and stressor experiences in adulthood." Developmental
Psychology. Nov 2010, 46, (6), 1651 - 1661. DOI: 10.1037/a0021020

32. McDonald, D. A.; Almeida, David M., "The interweave of fathers' daily
work experiences and fathering behaviors." Fathering. Fal 2004, 2, (3), 235
- 251. DOI: 10.3149/fth.0203.235

33. Mosley-Johnson, Elise; Garacci, Emma; Wagner, Nick; Mendez, Carlos;
Williams, Joni S.; Egede, Leonard E., "Assessing the relationship between
adverse childhood experiences and life satisfaction, psychological well-
being, and social well-being: United States Longitudinal Cohort 1995-2014."
Quality of Life Research. In press 2018,. DOI: 10.1007/s11136-018-2054-6

34. Mroczek, D.K.; Spiro, A.; Griffin, P.W.; Neupert, S., "Social
influences on adult personality, self-regulation and health." In Schaie,
K.W.; Carstensen, L., Social Structures, Aging and Self-regulation. 69 -
83, New York, NY: Springer,2006.

35. Mroczek, Daniel K.; Almeida, David M., "The effect of daily stress,
personality, and age on daily negative affect." Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology. Apr 2004, 72, (2), 355 - 378.

36. Mroczek, Daniel K.; Spiro, Avron, III; Almeida, David M., "Between- and
within-person variation in affect and personality over days and years:  How
basic and applied approaches can inform one another." Ageing International.
Sum 2003, 28, (3), 260 - 278. DOI: 10.1007/s12126-002-1007-z

37. Neiss, M.; Almeida, David M., "Age differences in the heritability of
mean and intraindividual variation of psychological distress." Gerontology.
Jan-Feb 2004, 50, (1), 22 - 27. DOI: 10.1159/0074385

38. Neupert, Shevaun D.; Almeida, D.M.; Turk Charles, Susan, "Age
differences in reactivity to daily stressors: The role of personal
control." Journals of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and
Social Sciences. Jul 2007, 62B, (4), P216 - P225. DOI:
10.1093/geronb/62.4.P216

39. Neupert, Shevaun D.; Miller, L. S.; Lachman, M. E., "Physiological
reactivity to cognitive stressors: Variations by age and socioeconomic
status." International Journal of Aging and Human Development. 2006, 62,
(3), 221 - 235. DOI: 10.2190/17DU-21AA-5HUK-7UFG

40. Piazza, Jennifer R.; Charles, Susan T.; Almeida, David M., "Living with
chronic health conditions: Age differences in affective well-being."
Journals of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences. Nov 2007, 62, 313 - 321. DOI: 10.1093/geronb/62.6.P313

41. Reading, Stephanie Rummans, "Relationship between Psychosocial Stress
and Allostatic Load: Findings from the MIDUS study." Dissertation,
University of California, Los Angeles, 2015.

42. Ruiz, Andrea L.; Acevedo, Gabriel A.; Marquez, Raquel R.; Marquez,
Marcos, "Expanding the utility of race-based accountability: An application
of RBA to longitudinal data analyses." Race and Justice. 2019, 9, (1), 60 -
79. DOI: 10.1177/2153368718811046

43. Selcuk, Emre; Gunaydin, Gul; Ong, Anthony D.; Almeida, David M., "Does
partner responsiveness predict hedonic and eudaimonic well-being? A 10-year
longitudinal study." Journal of Marriage and Family. Apr 2016, 78, (2), 311
- 325. DOI: 10.1111/jomf.12272

44. Serido, Joyce; Almeida, David M.; Wethington, Elaine, "Chronic
Stressors and Daily Hassles: Unique and Interactive Relationships with
Psychological Distress." Journal of Health and Social Behavior. Mar 2004,
45, (1), 17 - 33. DOI: 10.1177/002214650404500102

45. Stokes, Jeffrey E., "Trajectories of perceived neighborhood quality
across the life course: Sociodemographic determinants and implications for
well-being." Social Science Research. In press 2018,. DOI:
10.1016/j.ssresearch.2018.11.001

46. Surachman, A.; Wardecker, B.M.; Almeida, D.M., "Daily Stress and Well-
Being Among Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Adults in the United States."
Presented at the Gerontological Society of America 2018 Annual Scientific
Meeting, Gerontological Society of America, Boston, MA, Nov 14-18, 2018.
DOI: 10.1093/geroni/igy023.807

47. Treas, Judith; Gubernskaya, Zoya, "Did mobile phones increase adult
children’s maternal contact?." In Van Hook, J.; McHale, S.M.; King, V.,
Families and Technology. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing,2018. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-95540-7_8

48. Tse, Dwight C.K., "Volunteers' felt respect and its associations with
volunteering retention, daily affect, well-being, and mortality." Journals
of Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. In
press 2018,. DOI: 10.1093/geronb/gby117

49. Wethington, Elaine; Almeida, David M.; Brown, G.W.; Frank, E.; Kessler,
Ronald C., "The assessment of stressor exposure." In Vingerhoets, A.,
Assessment in Behavioral Medicine. 113 - 134, New York, NY: Taylor &
Francis,2001.

50. Wiese, Christopher W.; Chen, Zhuo J.; Tay, Louis; Friedman, Elliot M.;
Rector, Jerrald L., "The role of affect on physical health over time: A
cross-lagged panel analysis over 20 years." Applied Psychology. In press
2018,. DOI: 10.1111/aphw.12149

51. Wilson, John; Son, Joonmo, "The connection between neighboring and
volunteering." City and Community. Sep 2018, 17, (3), 720 - 736. DOI:
10.1111/cico.12324

52. Wong, J.D.; Almeida, D.M., "The effects of employment status and daily
stressors on time spent on daily household chores in middle-aged and older
adults." Gerontologist. in press 2012,. DOI: 10.1093/geront/gns047
